docs: new source plugin tutorial (#23363)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/tutorial/source-plugin-tutorial.md

If you paste the following query into the left side of the window and press the play button you should see data for posts with their IDs and descriptions returned:

```graphql
query {
  posts {
    id
    description
  }
}
```

This data is an example of the data you will source with your plugin.

_You can also see a running version of the GraphQL playground associated with a distinct API at [https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/](https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/), which is running the `api` folder in a Glitch project, like you would when you run `npm start` on your own computer._

#### Plugin behavior

Your plugin will have the following behavior:

- Make an API request to the demo API
- Convert the data in the API response to Gatsby's node system
- Link the nodes together so you can query for an author on each post
- Accept plugin options to customize how your plugin works

> - Optimize images from Unsplash URLs so they can be used with `gatsby-image`

Reviewer: Would you mind either adding periods or making the first letter of each list item lowercase for consistency? They're each complete sentences, so I'll leave the choice to you. (I personally lean towards periods.)

> - Make an API request to the demo API
> - Convert the data in the API response to Gatsby's node system
> - Link the nodes together so you can query for an author on each post
> - Accept plugin options to customize how your plugin works
> - Optimize images from Unsplash URLs so they can be used with `gatsby-image`

Author: ```suggestion
- Make an API request to the demo API.
- Convert the data in the API response to Gatsby's node system.
- Link the nodes together so you can query for an author on each post.
- Accept plugin options to customize how your plugin works.
- Optimize images from Unsplash URLs so they can be used with `gatsby-image`.
```

    `gatsby-plugin-sharp`,
    `gatsby-transformer-sharp`,
    // highlight-end
  ],
}
```

By installing the sharp plugins in the site, they'll run after the source plugin and transform the file nodes and add fields for the optimized versions at `childImageSharp`. The transformer plugin looks for `File` nodes with extensions like `.jpg` and `.png` to create optimized images and creates the GraphQL fields for you.

Now when you run your site, you will also be able to query a `childImageSharp` field on the `post.remoteImage`:

```graphql
query {
  allPost {
    nodes {
      remoteImage {
        // highlight-start
        childImageSharp {
          id
        }
        // highlight-end
      }
    }
  }
}
```

With data available, you can now query optimized images to use with the `gatsby-image` component in a site! You will need to install `gatsby-image` before you can use it.

### Create foreign key relationships between data

To link the posts to the authors, Gatsby needs to be aware that the two are associated, and how. You have already implemented one example of this when Gatsby inferred a connection between a `remoteImage` and the remote file from Unsplash.

> The best approach for connecting related data is through customizing the GraphQL schema. By implementing the `createSchemaCustomization` API, you can specify what data and its types can exist on nodes in Gatsby's GraphQL data layer.

Author: Certainly! It seems a little general and doesn't really say what it's doing to link data either.

```suggestion
The best approach for connecting related data is through customizing the GraphQL schema. By implementing the `createSchemaCustomization` API, you can specify the exact shape of a node's data. While defining that shape, you can optionally link a node to other nodes to create a relationship.
```

      author: Author @link(from: "author.name" by: "name")
    }
    type Author implements Node {
      id: ID!
      name: String!
    }`)
}
```

The `author: Author @link(from: "author.name" by: "name")` line tells Gatsby to look for the value on the `Post` node at `post.author.name` and relate it with an `Author` node with a matching `name`. This demonstrates the ability to link using more than just an ID.

The line `remoteImage: File @link` tells Gatsby to look for a `remoteImage` field on a `Post` node and link it to a `File` node with the ID there.

Now, instead of using inference in for the `remoteImage` field, you can take off the `___NODE` suffix. You can update the code in the `onCreateNode` API now like this:

```diff:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
  if (fileNode) {
-   node.remoteImage___NODE = fileNode.id
+   node.remoteImage = fileNode.id
  }
```

Now running the site will allow you to query authors and remoteImages from the post nodes!

```graphql
query {
  allPost {
    nodes {
      id
      // highlight-start
      author {
        name
      }
      remoteImage {
        id
      }
      // highlight-end
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Might be worth pointing out that forgetting to install `gatsby-image` will result in `remoteImage` being null at this point. Ask me how I know. 😅

### Using data from the source plugin in a site

In the `example-site`, you can now query data from pages.

Add a file at `example-site/src/pages/index.js` and copy the following code into it:

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Ensure you have `gatsby-image` installed in the site by running `npm install gatsby-image` which will take the optimized image data and render it.

```

```javascript:title=example-site/gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    // highlight-start
    {
      resolve: require.resolve(`../source-plugin`),
      options: {
        previewMode: true,
      },
    },
    // highlight-end
    `gatsby-plugin-sharp`,
    `gatsby-transformer-sharp`,
  ],
}
```

Now the options you designated (like `previewMode: true`) will be passed into each of the Gatsby Node APIs like `sourceNodes`, making options accessible inside of Gatsby APIs. Add an argument called `pluginOptions` to your `sourceNodes` function.

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = async (
  { actions, createContentDigest, createNodeId, getNodesByType },
  pluginOptions // highlight-line
) => {
  const { createNode, touchNode, deleteNode } = actions
  // highlight-start
  console.log(pluginOptions.previewMode) // true
  // highlight-end

  // ... other code removed for brevity
}
```

Options can be a good way of providing conditional paths to logic that you as a plugin author want to provide or limit.

### Proactively updating data with subscriptions

> The data sourced for your site was fetched using Apollo Client which supports subscriptions. GraphQL subscriptions _listen_ for changes in data and return changes to the GraphQL client. Your source plugin is able to listen—or subscribe—to the new data that is incoming. That means if a post has something on it updated, your source plugin can listen for that change and update the data in your site without having to restart your site, neat!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data sourced for your site was fetched using Apollo Client, which supports subscriptions. GraphQL subscriptions _listen_ for changes in data and return changes to the GraphQL client. Your source plugin is able to listen—or subscribe—to the new data that is incoming. That means if a post has something on it updated, your source plugin can listen for that change and update the data in your site without having to restart your site, neat!
```

  }

  // rest of code that creates nodes
}
```

Posts that are changed on the backend while Gatsby is running will be created if they are new or updated, and deleted if they were deleted on the backend.

You can test that this is working by running the site again and updating one of the posts. When you run the site this time you should see a message logged in the console: `Subscribing to content updates...`. Now, running an `updatePost` or `deletePost` mutation on the GraphQL server will send information to the subscription because it is now listening.

Follow these steps to test it out:

1. Open up your site at `localhost:8000` after you run `gatsby develop`
2. Open up the GraphQL playground at `localhost:4000` (if you are running the `api` folder locally) or `https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/` and first run a query for posts:

```graphql
query {
  posts {
    id
    description
  }
}
```

3. Copy the ID from the post that you would like to update
4. Inside the GraphQL playground, run an update post mutation, replacing `<id>` with the ID you just copied

```graphql
mutation {
  updatePost(id: "<id>", description: "These are my changes!") {
    id
  }
}
```

> 5. When you run the mutation the data will be updated on the backend, the subscription will recognize the change, Gatsby will update the node, and your page query will render the new data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. When you run the mutation, the data will be updated on the backend, the subscription will recognize the change, Gatsby will update the node, and your page query will render the new data.
```

## Why create a source plugin?

Source plugins convert data from any source into a format that Gatsby can process. Your Gatsby site can use several source plugins to combine data in interesting ways.

There may not be [an existing plugin](/plugins/?=gatsby-source) for your data source, so you can create your own.

_**NOTE:** if your data is local i.e. on your file system and part of your site's repo, then you generally don't want to create a new source plugin. Instead you want to use [gatsby-source-filesystem](/packages/gatsby-source-filesystem/) which handles reading and watching files for you. You can then use [transformer plugins](/plugins/?=gatsby-transformer) like [gatsby-transformer-yaml](/packages/gatsby-transformer-yaml/) to make queryable data from files._

## How to create a source plugin

### Overview

The plugin in this tutorial will source blog posts and authors from the demo API, link the posts and authors, and take image URLs from the posts and optimize them automatically. You'll be able to configure your plugin in your site's `gatsby-config.js` file and write GraphQL queries to access your plugin's data.

> This tutorial builds off of an existing Gatsby site and some data. If you want to follow along with this tutorial, you can find the codebase inside [the examples folder of the Gatsby repository](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/creating-source-plugins). Once you clone this code, make sure to delete the `source-plugin` and `example-site` folders. Otherwise, the tutorial steps will already be completed.

Reviewer 2: "Once you clone this code"

i miss a hint or a command how to clone a subdirectory. a new user did not have a clue how to do this. maybe add a git sparse checkout command for this?

Reviewer 2: i added a new issue for this:

- #24547 `Improve tutorial "create a source plugin"`

If you paste the following query into the left side of the window and press the play button, you should see data for posts with their IDs and descriptions returned:

```graphql
query {
  posts {
    id
    description
  }
}
```

This data is an example of the data you will source with your plugin.

_You can also see a running version of the GraphQL playground associated with a distinct API at [https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/](https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/), which is running the `api` folder in a Glitch project, like you would when you run `npm start` on your own computer._

#### Plugin behavior

Your plugin will have the following behavior:

- Make an API request to the demo API.
- Convert the data in the API response to Gatsby's node system.
- Link the nodes together so you can query for an author on each post.
- Accept plugin options to customize how your plugin works.
- Optimize images from Unsplash URLs so they can be used with `gatsby-image`.

### Set up projects for plugin development

You'll need to set up an example site and create a plugin inside it to begin building.

#### Set up an example site

> Create a new Gatsby site with the `gatsby new` command, based on the hello world starter.

Reviewer 2: i suggest here to add: "leave the api server running and open a new terminal (tab) to create a new Gatsby site."

and " move to the root folder of the example project" (because we was before in the api folder)

#### Query data from the API

Now you can replace the hardcoded data in the `sourceNodes` function with a GraphQL query:

```diff:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
  exports.sourceNodes = async ({
    actions,
    createContentDigest,
    createNodeId,
    getNodesByType,
  }) => {
    const { createNode, touchNode, deleteNode } = actions

-   const data = {
-     posts: [
-       { id: 1, description: `Hello world!` },
-       { id: 2, description: `Second post!` },
-     ],
-   }
+   const { data } = await client.query({
+     query: gql`
+       query {
+         posts {
+           id
+           description
+         }
+       }
+     `,

> +   })

Reviewer 2: with the diff tag it is not that easy to copy because it includes the `+` :(

      url: node.imgUrl,
      parentNodeId: node.id,
      createNode,
      createNodeId,
      getCache,
    })

    if (fileNode) {
      node.remoteImage___NODE = fileNode.id
    }
  }
}
```

This code is called every time a node is created, e.g. when `createNode` is invoked. Each time it is called in the `sourceNodes` step, the condition will check if the node was a `Post` node. Since those are the only nodes with an image associated with them, that is the only time images need to be optimized. Then a remote node is created, if it's successful, the `fileNode` is returned. The next few lines are important:

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
if (fileNode) {
  // save the ID of the fileNode on the Post node
  node.remoteImage___NODE = fileNode.id
}
```

By assigning a field called `remoteImage___NODE` to the ID of the `File` node that was created, Gatsby will be able to [infer](/docs/glossary#inference) a connection between this field and the file node. This will allow fields on the file to be queried from the post node.

```graphql
# leaving off the ___NODE field will give you:
query {
  allPost {
    nodes {
      id

>       remoteImage # returns an ID like "ecd83d94-7111-5386-bd3f-0066248b6fa9"

Reviewer 2: if i run `gatsby develop` before adding the `onCreateNode` it not get called, because the `Post` nodes already created and cached, so the `onCreateNode` is never called with `type=Post`

i had to do a gatsby clean to see the `remoteImage`...

For more background on source plugins, check out [Gatsby's source plugin documentation](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/)

## Why create a source plugin?

Source plugins convert data from any source into a format that can be processed by Gatsby. Your Gatsby site could use several source plugins to combine data in interesting ways.

There may not be [an existing plugin](/plugins/?=gatsby-source) for your data source, so you can create your own.

_**NOTE:** if your data is local i.e. on your file system and part of your site's repo, then you generally don't want to create a new source plugin. Instead you want to use [gatsby-source-filesystem](/packages/gatsby-source-filesystem/) which handles reading and watching files for you. You can then use [transformer plugins](/plugins/?=gatsby-transformer) like [gatsby-transformer-yaml](/packages/gatsby-transformer-yaml/) to make queryable data from files._

## How to create a source plugin

### Overview

> Your plugin will source blog posts and authors from the demo API, link the posts and authors, and take image URLs from the posts and optimize them automatically. You'll be able to configure your plugin in your site's `gatsby-config.js` file and write GraphQL queries to access your plugin's data.

Author: True, maybe more accurate would be "The plugin in this tutorial will..."

```suggestion
The plugin in this tutorial will source blog posts and authors from the demo API, link the posts and authors, and take image URLs from the posts and optimize them automatically. You'll be able to configure your plugin in your site's `gatsby-config.js` file and write GraphQL queries to access your plugin's data.
```

> Your plugin will source blog posts and authors from the demo API, link the posts and authors, and take image URLs from the posts and optimize them automatically. You'll be able to configure your plugin in your site's `gatsby-config.js` file and write GraphQL queries to access your plugin's data.

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me!

> The code for this tutorial can be referenced from [its place in the examples folder of the Gatsby repository](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/creating-source-plugins). You can clone this code and delete the `source-plugin` and `example-site` folders to follow along.

Author: Right, I think your rewording is helpful. The idea is give them an api, but be able to keep the code in the example folder with all the code wrapped up in a finished state to still serve as an example.

#### An example API request

> To see the API in action you can run it locally by navigating into the `api` folder, installing dependencies with `npm install`, and starting the server with `npm start`. You will then be able to navigate to a GraphQL playground running at `http://localhost:4000`. This is a GraphQL server running in Node.js and is _separate from Gatsby_, this server could be replaced with a different backend and the patterns in this tutorial would remain the same.

Reviewer 4: It would be valuable to also mention here that REST APIs also work (since you'll only showcase GraphQL)

Author: ```suggestion
To see the API in action you can run it locally by navigating into the `api` folder, installing dependencies with `npm install`, and starting the server with `npm start`. You will then be able to navigate to a GraphQL playground running at `http://localhost:4000`. This is a GraphQL server running in Node.js and is _separate from Gatsby_, this server could be replaced with a different backend or data source and the patterns in this tutorial would remain the same. Other possible examples could be a REST API, local files, or even a database, so long as you can access data it can be sourced.
```

If you paste the following query into the left side of the window and press the play button you should see data for posts with their IDs and descriptions returned:

```graphql
query {
  posts {
    id
    description
  }
}
```

This data is an example of the data you will source with your plugin.

> _You can also see a running version of the GraphQL playground associated with a distinct API at [https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/](https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/), which is running the `api` folder in a Glitch project, like you would when you run `npm start` on your own computer._

Reviewer 4: Could/Should people also use this instead of running it locally?

Author: Yes, it is possible to use this endpoint instead. But I opted not to totally encourage that since a shared endpoint with public update access could result in some weird scenarios where someone is updating data and it changes for someone else going through the tutorial at the same time. 

A benefit of Glitch is that it sleeps after a while of inactivity and since the data is stored in-memory, it erases the data back to its original state after a few minutes of not using it.

For me, being able to see that code on the backend was helpful for me in understanding where the plugin sat in the grander scheme of things though 🤷‍♂️

### Setup projects for plugin development

You'll need to setup an example site and create a plugin inside it to begin building.

#### Setup an example site

Create a new Gatsby site with the `gatsby new` command, based on the hello world starter.

```shell
gatsby new example-site https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-hello-world
```

This site generated by the `new` command is where the plugin will be installed, giving you a place to test the code for your plugin.

#### Setup a source plugin

Create a new Gatsby plugin with the `gatsby new` command, this time based on the plugin starter.

```shell
gatsby new source-plugin https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-plugin
```

This will create your plugin in a separate project than your example site, but you could also include it in your [site's `plugins` folder](/docs/loading-plugins-from-your-local-plugins-folder/).

Your plugin starts with a few files from the starter, which can be seen in the snippet below:

```text
/example-site
/source-plugin
├── .gitignore
├── gatsby-browser.js
├── gatsby-node.js
├── gatsby-ssr.js
├── index.js
├── package.json
└── README.md
```

> The file where all the logic will live is in the **`gatsby-node.js`**. This file is where Gatsby expects to find any usage of the [Gatsby Node APIs](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/node-apis/). These allow customization/extension of default Gatsby settings affecting pieces of the site build process. This file is where all the logic for sourcing data will live.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The file where all the logic will live is in the **`gatsby-node.js`**. This file is where Gatsby expects to find any usage of the [Gatsby Node APIs](/docs/node-apis/). These allow customization/extension of default Gatsby settings affecting pieces of the site build process. This file is where all the logic for sourcing data will live.
```

#### Install your plugin in the example site

> You need to install your plugin in the site to be able to test that your code is running. Gatsby only knows to run plugins that are included in its `gatsby-config.js` file. Open up the `gatsby-config.js` file in the `example-site` and [add your plugin using `require.resolve`](/docs/creating-a-local-plugin/#using-requireresolve-and-a-filepath).

Author: That's a great point, will add a blurb about that 👍 

```suggestion
You need to install your plugin in the site to be able to test that your code is running. Gatsby only knows to run plugins that are included in its `gatsby-config.js` file. Open up the `gatsby-config.js` file in the `example-site` and [add your plugin using `require.resolve`](/docs/creating-a-local-plugin/#using-requireresolve-and-a-filepath). If you decide to publish your plugin it can be installed with an `npm install <plugin-name>` and including the name of the plugin in the config instead of `require.resolve`.
```

```javascript:title=example-site/gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [require.resolve(`../source-plugin`)],
}
```

_You can include the plugin by using solely its name if you are using [npm link or yarn workspaces](/docs/creating-a-local-plugin/#using-npm-link-or-yarn-link) or place your `source-plugin` in [`example-site/plugins`](/docs/creating-a-local-plugin/) instead of being in a folder a step above and using `require.resolve`._

You can now navigate into the `example-site` folder and run `gatsby develop`. You should see a line in the output in the terminal that shows your plugin loaded:

> ```text

Author: Yeah you're right!

```suggestion
```shell
```

#### Create nodes inside of `sourceNodes` with the `createNode` function

Open up the `gatsby-node.js` file in the `source-plugin` and add the following code to create nodes from a hardcoded array of data :

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
// constants for your GraphQL Post and Author types
const POST_NODE_TYPE = `Post`

exports.sourceNodes = async ({
  actions,
  createContentDigest,
  createNodeId,
  getNodesByType,
}) => {
  const { createNode } = actions

  const data = {
    posts: [
      { id: 1, description: `Hello world!` },
      { id: 2, description: `Second post!` },
    ],
  }

  // loop through data and create Gatsby nodes
  data.posts.forEach(post =>
    createNode({
      ...post,
      id: createNodeId(`${POST_NODE_TYPE}-${post.id}`),
      parent: null,
      children: [],
      internal: {
        type: POST_NODE_TYPE,
        content: JSON.stringify(post),
        contentDigest: createContentDigest(post),
      },
    })
  )

  return
}
```

> This code creates Gatsby node's that are queryable in a site. To the following steps break down what is happening in the code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This code creates Gatsby nodes that are queryable in a site. The following bullets break down what is happening in the code:
```

> - you implemented Gatsby's [`sourceNodes` API](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) which Gatsby will run as part of its bootstrap process, and pulled out some Gatsby helpers (like `createContentDigest` and `createNodeId`) to facilitate creating nodes

Reviewer 4: We should mention here that createContentDigest is important for tracking of dirty nodes and it should be included with the whole content of the item (`post` in this case)

Reviewer 3: Agreed, some kind of link or explanation for what that is would be good.

Author: Good though! 

```suggestion
- you implemented Gatsby's [`sourceNodes` API](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) which Gatsby will run as part of its bootstrap process, and pulled out some Gatsby helpers (like `createContentDigest` and `createNodeId`) to facilitate creating nodes
- you provided the required fields for the node like creating a node ID and a content digest (which Gatsby uses to track dirty nodes—or nodes that have changed), the content digest should include the whole content of the item (`post` in this case)
```

### Querying and sourcing data from a remote location

You can query data from any location to source at build time using functions and libraries like Node.js's built-in `http.get`, `axios`, or `node-fetch`. This tutorial uses a GraphQL client so that the source plugin can support GraphQL subscriptions when it fetches data from the demo API, and can proactively update your data in the site when information on the API changes.

#### Adding dependencies

You'll use several modules from npm to making fetching data with GraphQL easier. Install them with:

```shell
npm install apollo-cache-inmemory apollo-client apollo-link apollo-link-http apollo-link-ws apollo-utilities graphql graphql-tag node-fetch ws
```

_Note: The libraries used here are specifically chosen so that the source plugin can support GraphQL subscriptions. You can fetch data the same way you would in any other Node.js app or however you are most comfortable._

Open your `package.json` file after installation and you'll see the packages have been added to a `dependencies` section at the end of the file.

#### Configure an Apollo client to fetch data

> Import the handful of Apollo packages that you installed that help setup an Apollo client in your plugin:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Import the handful of Apollo packages that you installed to help set up an Apollo client in your plugin:
```

const { getMainDefinition } = require("apollo-utilities")
const fetch = require("node-fetch")
const gql = require("graphql-tag")
const WebSocket = require("ws")
// highlight-end

const POST_NODE_TYPE = `Post`

exports.sourceNodes = async ({
// ...
```

Then you can copy this code that sets up the necessary pieces of the Apollo client and paste it after your imports:

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
// ... imports
const WebSocket = require("ws")

const POST_NODE_TYPE = `Post`

// highlight-start
const client = new ApolloClient({
  link: split(
    ({ query }) => {
      const definition = getMainDefinition(query)
      return (
        definition.kind === "OperationDefinition" &&
        definition.operation === "subscription"
      )
    },
    new WebSocketLink({
      uri: `ws://localhost:4000`, // or `ws://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/`
      options: {
        reconnect: true,
      },
      webSocketImpl: WebSocket,
    }),
    new HttpLink({
      uri: "http://localhost:4000", // or `https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/`
      fetch,
    })
  ),
  cache: new InMemoryCache(),
})
// highlight-end

exports.sourceNodes = async ({
// ...
```

> You can read about each of the packages that are working together in [Apollo's docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/), but the end result is creating a `client` that you can use to call methods like `query` on to get data from the source it's configured to work with. In this case, that is `localhost:4000` where you should have the API running. If you can't configure the API to run locally, you can update the URLs for the client to use `gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me` where a version of the API is deployed, instead of `localhost:4000`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can read about each of the packages that are working together in [Apollo's docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/). The end result is creating a `client` that you can use to call methods like `query` to get data from the source it's configured to work with. In this case, that is `localhost:4000` where you should have the API running. If you can't configure the API to run locally, you can update the URLs for the client to use `gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me` where a version of the API is deployed, instead of `localhost:4000`.
```

#### Query data from the API

Now you can replace the hardcoded data in the `sourceNodes` function with a GraphQL query:

```diff:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
  exports.sourceNodes = async ({
    actions,
    createContentDigest,
    createNodeId,
    getNodesByType,
  }) => {
    const { createNode, touchNode, deleteNode } = actions

-   const data = {

> -     posts: [

Reviewer 3: Is this not still hardcoded data? Is this an accident?

Author: I made this code block a diff so you can really tell that this old stuff got deleted (it has the `-` signs on the left and gets marked in red) and the new data for the query is below it with `+` signs and is marked in green.

-       { id: 1, description: `Hello world!` },
-       { id: 2, description: `Second post!` },
-     ],
-   }
+   const { data } = await client.query({
+     query: gql`
+       query {
+         posts {
+           id
+           description
+         }
+       }
+     `,
+   })

    // ...
```

> Now you're creating nodes based on data coming from the API, neat! However, only the `id` and `description` fields are coming back from the API and being saved to each node, so add the rest of the fields to the query so that there will be the same data available to Gatsby.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now you're creating nodes based on data coming from the API, neat! However, only the `id` and `description` fields are coming back from the API and being saved to each node, so add the rest of the fields to the query so that the same data is available to Gatsby.
```

    createNode({
      ...author,
      id: createNodeId(`${AUTHOR_NODE_TYPE}-${author.id}`), // hashes the inputs into an ID
      parent: null,
      children: [],
      internal: {
        type: AUTHOR_NODE_TYPE,
        content: JSON.stringify(author),
        contentDigest: createContentDigest(author),
      },
    })
  )
  // highlight-end

  return
}
```

At this point you should be able to run `gatsby develop` in your `example-site`, open up GraphiQL at `http://localhost:8000/___graphql` and query both posts and authors.

```graphql
query {
  allPost {
    nodes {
      id
      description
      imgUrl
    }
  }
  allAuthor {
    nodes {
      id
      name
    }
  }
}
```

### Optimize remote images

Each node of post data has an `imgUrl` field with the URL of an image on Unsplash. You could use that URL to load images on your site, but they will be large and take a long time to load. You can optimize the images with your source plugin so that a site using your plugin already has data for `gatsby-image` ready to go!

You can read about [how to use Gatsby Image to prevent image bloat](/docs/using-gatsby-image/) if you are unfamiliar with it.

> #### Create `remoteFilenNode`'s from a URL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Create `remoteFileNode`'s from a URL
```

> To create optimized images from URLs, `File` nodes for image files need to be added to your site's data. Then, `gatsby-plugin-sharp` and `gatsby-transformer-sharp` need to be installed, and they will automatically find image files and add the data needed for `gatsby-image`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create optimized images from URLs, `File` nodes for image files need to be added to your site's data. Then, you can install `gatsby-plugin-sharp` and `gatsby-transformer-sharp` which will automatically find image files and add the data needed for `gatsby-image`.
```

> Start by installing `gatsby-source-filesystem` in the `source-plugin`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Start by installing `gatsby-source-filesystem` in the `source-plugin` project:
```

```shell:title=source-plugin
npm install gatsby-source-filesystem
```

> Now in your plugin's `gatsby-node`, you can implement a new API that gets called everytime a node is created called `onCreateNode`. You can check if the node created was one of your `Post` nodes, and if it was, create a file from the URL on the `imgUrl` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now in your plugin's `gatsby-node.js` file, you can implement a new API,  called `onCreateNode`, that gets called every time a node is created. You can check if the node created was one of your `Post` nodes, and if it was, create a file from the URL on the `imgUrl` field.
```

const { InMemoryCache } = require("apollo-cache-inmemory")
const { split } = require("apollo-link")
const { HttpLink } = require("apollo-link-http")
const { WebSocketLink } = require("apollo-link-ws")
const { getMainDefinition } = require("apollo-utilities")
const fetch = require("node-fetch")
const gql = require("graphql-tag")
const WebSocket = require("ws")
// highlight-start
const { createRemoteFileNode } = require(`gatsby-source-filesystem`)
// highlight-end
```

Then export a new function `onCreateNode`, and call `createRemoteFileNode` in it whenever a node of of type `Post` is created:

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
// called each time a node is created
exports.onCreateNode = async ({
  node, // the node that was just created
  actions: { createNode },
  createNodeId,
  getCache,
}) => {
  if (node.internal.type === POST_NODE_TYPE) {
    const fileNode = await createRemoteFileNode({
      // the url of the remote image to generate a node for
      url: node.imgUrl,
      parentNodeId: node.id,
      createNode,
      createNodeId,
      getCache,
    })

    if (fileNode) {
      node.remoteImage___NODE = fileNode.id
    }
  }
}
```

> This code is called every time a node is created, i.e. when `createNode` is invoked. Each time it is called in the `sourceNodes` step, the condition will check if the node was a `Post` node since those are the only nodes with an image associated with them in your case. Then a remote node is created, if it's successful, the `fileNode` is returned. The next few lines are important:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This code is called every time a node is created, e.g. when `createNode` is invoked. Each time it is called in the `sourceNodes` step, the condition will check if the node was a `Post` node. Since those are the only nodes with an image associated with them, that is the only time images need to be optimized. Then a remote node is created, if it's successful, the `fileNode` is returned. The next few lines are important:
```

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
if (fileNode) {
  // save the ID of the fileNode on the Post node
  node.remoteImage___NODE = fileNode.id
}
```

> By assigning a field called `remoteImage___NODE` the ID of the `File` node that was created, Gatsby will be able to [infer](/docs/glossary#inference) a connection between this field and the file node. This will allow fields on the file to be queried from the post node.

Reviewer 3: I think a word is missing in the first sentence?

Author: Yeah this sounds weird, fixing...

```suggestion
By assigning a field called `remoteImage___NODE` to the ID of the `File` node that was created, Gatsby will be able to [infer](/docs/glossary#inference) a connection between this field and the file node. This will allow fields on the file to be queried from the post node.
```

    }
  }
}
# instead of an entire node you can query more fields on:
query {
  allPost {
    nodes {
      id
      remoteImage {
        id
        relativePath
      }
    }
  }
}
```

_**Note**: you can use [schema customization APIs](/docs/schema-customization) to create these kind of connections between nodes that are sturdier and more strictly typed as well._

At this point you have created local image files from the remote locations and associated them with your posts, but you still need to transform the files into optimized versions.

#### Transform `File` nodes with sharp plugins

Sharp plugins make optimization of images possible at build time.

Install `gatsby-plugin-sharp` and `gatsby-transformer-sharp` in the `example-site` (_not_ the plugin):

```shell:title=example-site
npm install gatsby-plugin-sharp gatsby-transformer-sharp
```

Then include the plugins in your `gatsby-config`:

```javascript:title=example-site/gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    require.resolve(`../source-plugin`),
    // highlight-start
    `gatsby-plugin-sharp`,
    `gatsby-transformer-sharp`,
    // highlight-end
  ],
}
```

> By installing the sharp plugins in the site, they'll run after the source plugin and transform the file nodes and add fields for the optimized versions at `childImageSharp`. The transformer plugin looks for `File` nodes with extensions like `.jpg` and `.png` to create optimized images from, and creates the GraphQL fields for you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By installing the sharp plugins in the site, they'll run after the source plugin and transform the file nodes and add fields for the optimized versions at `childImageSharp`. The transformer plugin looks for `File` nodes with extensions like `.jpg` and `.png` to create optimized images and creates the GraphQL fields for you.
```

To link the posts to the authors, Gatsby needs to be aware that the two are associated, and how. You have already implemented one example of this when Gatsby inferred a connection between a `remoteImage` and the remote file from Unsplash.

The best approach for connecting related data is through customizing the GraphQL schema. By implementing the `createSchemaCustomization` API, you can specify what data and its types can exist on nodes in Gatsby's GraphQL data layer.

Copy this code and add it to the `source-plugin` in the `gatsby-node.js` file:

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
exports.createSchemaCustomization = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  createTypes(`
    type Post implements Node {
      id: ID!
      slug: String!
      description: String!
      imgUrl: String!
      imgAlt: String!
      # create relationships between Post and File nodes for optimized images
      remoteImage: File @link
      # create relationships between Post and Author nodes
      author: Author @link(from: "author.name" by: "name")
    }
    type Author implements Node {
      id: ID!
      name: String!
    }`)
}
```

> The `author: Author @link(from: "author.name" by: "name")` line tells Gatsby to look for the value on the post node at `post.author.name` and relate it with an `Author` node with a matching `name`. This demonstrates the ability to link using more than just an ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `author: Author @link(from: "author.name" by: "name")` line tells Gatsby to look for the value on the `Post` node at `post.author.name` and relate it with an `Author` node with a matching `name`. This demonstrates the ability to link using more than just an ID.
```

The line `remoteImage: File @link` tells Gatsby to look for a `remoteImage` field on a `Post` node and link it to a `File` node with the ID there.

Now, instead of using inference in for the `remoteImage` field, you can take off the `___NODE` suffix. You can update the code in the `onCreateNode` API now like this:

```diff:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
  if (fileNode) {
-   node.remoteImage___NODE = fileNode.id
+   node.remoteImage = fileNode.id
  }
```

Now running the site will allow you to query authors and remoteImages from the post nodes!

```graphql
query {
  allPost {
    nodes {
      id
      // highlight-start
      author {
        name
      }
      remoteImage {
        id
      }
      // highlight-end
    }
  }
}
```

### Using data from the source plugin in a site

> In the `example-site`, data is now available to be queried from pages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `example-site`, you can now query data from pages.
```

> Add a file at `example-site/src/pages/index.js` and copy in the following code into it:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add a file at `example-site/src/pages/index.js` and copy the following code into it:
```

> ```javascript:title=example-site/src/pages/index.js

Reviewer 3: Should this snippet include so much styling? I know it's nicer for display, but it obscures the functionality a bit. Perhaps highlighting the actual content-based stuff makes sense?

Author: Good point, I just copy pasted, it doesn't really need all this though

Author: Just removed 10 lines by removing extraneous styles, I left a few that provide layout though.

        display: `grid`,
        gridTemplateColumns: `repeat( auto-fit, minmax(250px, 1fr) )`,
        gridGap: 16,
        justifyContent: "space-between",
      }}
    >
      {data.allPost.nodes.map(post => (
        <div
          style={{
            display: `flex`,
            flexDirection: `column`,
            justifyContent: `space-between`,
            padding: 16,
            border: `1px solid #ccc`,
            borderRadius: 8,
          }}
        >
          <h2>{post.slug}</h2>
          <span>By: {post.author.name}</span>
          <p>{post.description}</p>
          <Img
            fluid={post.remoteImage.childImageSharp.fluid}
            alt={post.imgAlt}
            style={{
              maxHeight: 300,
            }}
          />
        </div>
      ))}
    </section>
  </div>
)

export const query = graphql`
  {
    allPost {
      nodes {
        id
        slug
        description
        imgAlt
        author {
          id
          name
        }
        remoteImage {
          id
          childImageSharp {
            id
            fluid {
              ...GatsbyImageSharpFluid
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
`
```

> This code uses a [page query](/docs/page-query/) to fetch all posts and provide them to the component in the `data` prop at build time. The posts are looped through and rendered to the DOM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This code uses a [page query](/docs/page-query/) to fetch all posts and provide them to the component in the `data` prop at build time. The JSX code loops through the posts so they can be rendered to the DOM.
```

### Using plugin options to customize plugin usage

> You can pass options into a plugin through the `gatsby-config.js`. Update the code where your plugin is installed in the `example-site`, changing it from a string, to an object with a `resolve` and `options` key.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can pass options into a plugin through a `gatsby-config.js` file. Update the code where your plugin is installed in the `example-site`, changing it from a string, to an object with a `resolve` and `options` key.
```

```javascript:title=example-site/gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    // highlight-start
    {
      resolve: require.resolve(`../source-plugin`),
      options: {
        previewMode: true,
      },
    },
    // highlight-end
    `gatsby-plugin-sharp`,
    `gatsby-transformer-sharp`,
  ],
}
```

> Now you can access the second argument on Node APIs to access the options passed in. Add an argument called `pluginOptions` to your `sourceNodes` function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now you can use the second argument on Node APIs to access the options passed in. Add an argument called `pluginOptions` to your `sourceNodes` function.
```
Not sure I understand the first sentence.

Author: Yeah, I'll rework that...

```suggestion
Now the options you designated (like `previewMode: true`) will be passed into each of the Gatsby Node APIs like `sourceNodes`, making options accessible inside of Gatsby APIs. Add an argument called `pluginOptions` to your `sourceNodes` function.
```

```javascript:title=source-plugin/gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = async (
  { actions, createContentDigest, createNodeId, getNodesByType },
  pluginOptions // highlight-line
) => {
  const { createNode, touchNode, deleteNode } = actions
  // highlight-start
  console.log(pluginOptions.previewMode) // true
  // highlight-end

  // ... other code removed for brevity
}
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Do we need to add any defaults for this plugin option?

Author: The code will work with the current logic, the code for `previewMode` only runs when it's true since it will be undefined otherwise and won't pass the `if (previewMode)` check. Defining a default might be helpful so that someone going through this thinks about them though 🤷‍♂️

Options can be a good way of providing conditional paths to logic that you as a plugin author want to provide or limit.

### Proactively updating data with subscriptions

The data sourced for your site was fetched using Apollo Client which supports subscriptions. GraphQL subscriptions _listen_ for changes in data and return changes to the GraphQL client. Your source plugin is able to listen—or subscribe—to the new data that is incoming. That means if a post has something on it updated, your source plugin can listen for that change and update the data in your site without having to restart your site, neat!

> The API you connect to needs to provides support for live changes to data in order for this to be possible. You can read about other options for live data updates in the [creating a source plugin guide](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The API you connect to needs to provide support for live changes to data in order for this to be possible. You can read about other options for live data updates in the [creating a source plugin guide](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/).
```

> You already setup your client to handle subscriptions by providing a websocket link (`ws://localhost:4000` or `ws://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/`). Now you need to add some logic to your `sourceNodes` function to handle updating and deleting nodes, rather than just creating them. The first step will be touching nodes, to make sure that Gatsby doesn't discard the nodes that don't get updated when `sourceNodes` gets called.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You already set up your client to handle subscriptions by providing a websocket link (`ws://localhost:4000` or `ws://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/`). Now you need to add some logic to your `sourceNodes` function to handle updating and deleting nodes, rather than just creating them. The first step will be touching nodes, to make sure that Gatsby doesn't discard the nodes that don't get updated when `sourceNodes` gets called.
```

      console.log(`Subscription received:`)
      console.log(data.posts)
      data.posts.forEach(post => {
        const nodeId = createNodeId(`${POST_NODE_TYPE}-${post.id}`)
        switch (post.status) {
          case "deleted":
            deleteNode({
              node: getNode(nodeId),
            })
            break
          case "created":
          case "updated":
          default:
            // created and updated can be handled by the same code path
            // the post's id is presumed to stay constant (or can be inferred)
            createNode({
              ...post,
              id: createNodeId(`${POST_NODE_TYPE}-${post.id}`),
              parent: null,
              children: [],
              internal: {
                type: POST_NODE_TYPE,
                content: JSON.stringify(post),
                contentDigest: createContentDigest(post),
              },
            })
            break
        }
      })
    })
    // highlight-end
  }

  // rest of code that creates nodes
}
```

Posts that are changed on the backend while Gatsby is running will be created if they are new or updated, and deleted if they were deleted on the backend.

> You can test that this is working by running the site again and updating one of the posts. When you run the site this time you should see the message logged in the console: `Subscribing to content updates...` that was added. Now, running an `updatePost` or `deletePost` mutation on the GraphQL server will send information to the subscription because it is now listening.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can test that this is working by running the site again and updating one of the posts. When you run the site this time you should see a message logged in the console: `Subscribing to content updates...`. Now, running an `updatePost` or `deletePost` mutation on the GraphQL server will send information to the subscription because it is now listening.
```

Follow these steps to test it out:

> 1. open up your site at `localhost:8000` after you run `gatsby develop`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Open up your site at `localhost:8000` after you run `gatsby develop`
```

> 2. open up the GraphQL playground at `localhost:4000` (if you are running the `api` folder locally) or `https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/` and first run a query for posts:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Open up the GraphQL playground at `localhost:4000` (if you are running the `api` folder locally) or `https://gatsby-source-plugin-api.glitch.me/` and first run a query for posts:
```

```graphql
query {
  posts {
    id
    description
  }
}
```

> 3. copy the ID from the post that you would like to update

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Copy the ID from the post that you would like to update
```

> 4. inside the GraphQL playground, run an update post mutation, replacing `<id>` with the ID you just copied

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Inside the GraphQL playground, run an update post mutation, replacing `<id>` with the ID you just copied
```

```graphql
mutation {
  updatePost(id: "<id>", description: "These are my changes!") {
    id
  }
}
```

> 5. when you run the mutation the data will be updated on the backend, the subscription will recognize the change, Gatsby will update the node, and your page query will render the new data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. When you run the mutation the data will be updated on the backend, the subscription will recognize the change, Gatsby will update the node, and your page query will render the new data
```

> It's so fast it's a blink and you'll miss it kind of moment, so try running another mutation or even run a `deletePost` mutation to make it easier to see the changes!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's so fast that it's a blink and you'll miss it kind of moment, so try running another mutation or even run a `deletePost` mutation to make it easier to see the changes!
```
